Onboarding: Intermediate lectures (+ runnable Aiken and Mesh examples) (#1951)
cardano-foundation/developer-portal: docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/8-validator-purposes.md

These are the purposes you will meet:

| Purpose | Runs when… | The question it's asked |
|---|---|---|
| **spend** | someone spends a UTxO locked at the script address | may this locked UTxO be spent? |
| **mint** | a transaction creates or burns tokens under the script's policy | may these tokens come into existence, or stop existing? |
| **withdraw** | staking rewards are withdrawn under the script | may these rewards be taken? |
| **publish / vote / propose** | certificates or governance actions are submitted | may this certificate or vote go through? |

Every purpose works the same way. Something in a transaction touches your script, the network runs your validator, and it answers **yes or no**. Only the trigger and the thing being guarded change. You have already seen a simpler version of the mint purpose. The Beginner [minting example](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/beginner/tokens-fungible-and-nfts) used a **native script** as its policy. You use a validator instead when the rule needs to do more than check who signs and when.

> The handler you write changes a little between purposes, because the question changes. A **spend** handler is given the **datum**, because there is a locked UTxO with a note attached to it. A **mint** handler is not, because nothing is being unlocked. Instead it is told which policy is being minted under. All of them receive the redeemer and the whole transaction. Your vault uses **spend** today. In this lecture it gains **mint** as well.

Reviewer: Only Aiken has handlers; the rest have different methods. Put Aiken-specific remarks inside tabs.

Reviewer: Also, `spend` having a datum on top of the redeemer and context is fundamental Cardano behavior. The `mint` handler having the policy at hand, the `withdraw` having the credential at hand, etc., is Aiken-specific behavior. One is fundamental to the blockchain; the others are syntax sugar. Maybe we can not mention anything about these distinctions for now, if it gets too confusing.

> ## One validator, many purposes, one hash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## One validator, one hash, many purposes
```

A **single validator** can handle **several purposes at once**, and it has exactly **one hash**. That one hash is all of these at the same time:

> - its **address** (for the _spend_ purpose),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- its **payment credential** (for the _spend_ purpose),
```

- its **policy ID** (for the _mint_ purpose),
- its **stake credential** (for the _withdraw_ purpose).

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    S["your validator,<br/>compiled"] -->|hash it| H["one script hash"]

>     H -->|written as an address| A["`**spend**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    H -->|works as payment credential (inside address)| A["`**spend**
```

    guards the UTxOs locked there`"]

>     H -->|written as a policy ID| P["`**mint**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    H -->|works as a policy ID| P["`**mint**
```

    guards tokens issued under it`"]

>     H -->|registered as a stake credential| W["`**withdraw**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    H -->|works as stake credential (inside address)| W["`**withdraw**
```

    guards reward withdrawals`"]
```

> The hash **is** the script's identity, and where you put that hash decides which question the network asks it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hash **is** the script's identity, and the way you use that hash decides which question the network asks it.
```

Because the script sees its own hash in more than one role, it can **connect** them. One script can create a token and also control how the UTxO holding that token is spent, all under one identity. Many real Cardano designs are built this way, using a token as a mark that says "this UTxO is the real one", which only that same script could have created.

> ## Your vault declares only one purpose, so far

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Your vault declares only one purpose
```

<Tabs groupId="onchain">
<TabItem value="aiken" label="Aiken" default>

```aiken
else(_) {
  fail
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="scalus" label="Scalus">

A [Scalus](https://scalus.org/) version is coming soon. The idea is identical, only the language differs.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

That is what it has been doing all along: covering **every other purpose**. If anything tries to use this script as a minting policy, or a stake credential, or anything else besides spending, the answer is no. Writing only a spend handler is not the same as making spending the only thing possible. You will see this pair, one real handler plus a refusing `else`, in most small contracts.

## Giving the vault a token of its own

One script *can* carry every purpose at once. Whether it *should* is a design decision, and the vault is about to make the other one.

The token gets a script to itself: a validator whose only handler is `mint`. Its hash is the token's policy id, and it has nothing to do with the vault's address.

> Splitting them costs a little. The rules stay small, each one answering about the thing it guards. And the hashes stop moving together, which matters here because **[parameters](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/parameters)** just put a blank in the vault.

Reviewer: Not really what we're doing here:
- We don't put them together because we're not creating a token for the vault. It's just a random token we use as an example; it doesn't belong to the vault protocol. Because of that, we may want to run the minting policy separately at some point. They don't work together really.
- The first transaction only runs the minting policy, and the second only runs the spending policy. They never run together.

I'd maybe change this whole section to learn about minting policies, and that's it. 🤔

Reviewer: Also, we changed "VAULT" to "TOKEN A"

  {extractRegion(VaultAiken, "token-name")}
</CodeBlock>

Now the rule for the token itself. Write it as a **second validator**, below the vault:

<CodeBlock language="aiken" title="validators/vault.ak">
  {extractRegion(VaultAiken, "mint-validator")}
</CodeBlock>

Read the arguments, because they differ from `spend`. **No datum reaches this handler**: a datum belongs to the UTxO being unlocked, and minting unlocks nothing. The transaction can still attach a datum to an output it creates, and the one that mints a token and locks it does, but that note belongs to the new vault UTxO and the mint rule is never handed it. Instead the handler is told its own `policy_id`, which is this script's hash.

`self.mint` holds everything the transaction creates or destroys, under every policy. `assets.tokens` gives back only the tokens minted under this one, as a dictionary of token name to amount, and `dict.to_pairs` turns that into a list. Matching the list against `[Pair(name, _)]` succeeds only if it holds exactly one entry, so the transaction cannot mint a second name under this policy. `name == vault_token` then decides which name that has to be.

> **Notice which script this is.** The vault takes `recovery` as a parameter and this policy takes none, so the two hashes move independently. Change your backup key and the vault's address changes, from **[parameters](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/parameters)**. The policy id stays exactly where it was, because there is nothing in it to change. Every reader of this track ends up with a different vault and the same token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Notice which script this is.** The vault takes `recovery` as a parameter, and this policy takes none, so no need to apply parameters to this one. Change your backup key, and the vault's address changes, from **[parameters](/docs/developers/onboarding/lectures/intermediate/parameters)**. The policy ID stays exactly where it was, because there is nothing to change. Every reader of this track ends up with a different vault and the same token.
```
They move independently because they are different scripts, not because of the parameters.
